---
title:  "IDID-3210"
date:   2022-09-11 14:14:22 -0700
layout: default
categories: techblog
---

Recently I made the mistake of attempting to log in to my Spectrum account.
As a conscious human being with not-so-fond memories of Time Warner Cable,
I'm aware that using Spectrum for internet is a fool's errand. But I have
no choice in the small New England town that I now live in. Thanks, FCC.

<!-- readmore -->

As you'd expect, my attempt to log in to my account didn't go well. I
entered valid credentials, and the auth portal spit out:

```
We’re sorry, we’re unable to sign you in. Please try again later. IDID-3210.
```

Here's how I escaped the horrors of `IDID-3210`.

1. I use a [DNS black hole](https://pi-hole.net/) to block ads.
   I whitelisted `pov.spectrum.net` based on some suggestions from Reddit users.
2. I used Safari with NO extensions and an essentially clean browsing history.
3. After 3 login attempts, I got in.

No matter how hard I try, I cannot authenticate from Firefox or even Chromium.
Let alone with an ad blocker like uBlock Origin. Based on the massive amount of
console errors I see when I try to log in, I would guess that there's some sort
of cross-site-scripting faux pas happening in the login portal. And based on my
attempts to log in from my phone on my cellular internet connection, I think
IDID-3210 somehow blocks auth attempts after a certain number of failures.

It's got nothing to do with special characters present or missing from your
password.

It has everything to do with an immensely incompetent megacompany with a
stranglehold on internet access in the United States that is so poorly run
they literally *cannot even code an authentication portal*. That's something
that even I can do. And I'm not even a software developer any more!

I reiterate: thanks, FCC.
